everyone wants more sex better sex and
there is huge amount that we can do that
can guarantee great sex for the rest of
your life so that the best place to
start is Dr Karen gurny she is a
clinical psychologist and psychos
sexologist that has been helping
individuals and couples overcome sexual
problems for 20 years she's lead
psychologist in an award-winning NHS sex
clinic this might be surprising to some
people 52% of women and 42% of men are
unhappy with the sex lives that they
have and that's because as a society
we've got sex all wrong for example the
way desire is represented to us is lust
passion spontaneity but it's not the
norm and the problem is a lot of people
are waiting to feel like that and
they're waiting a really long time what
we need to do instead is be aware that
our desire can be triggered using what I
call sexual currency I'll go into that
we also know that penis and vagina sex
is women's least favorite sexual act but
that's how we see how sex should be so
we see less pleasure and less reward for
women but also if you ask most people
how often they should be having sex
everyone says three times a week it's
actually drastically different than that
three times a month and that shows the
way we understand sex is all wrong so I
have questions do you think you should
schedule sex no what you should do
though is fantasies fetishes what if
your partner says I don't like it well I
can talk you through that if you like
parents who are struggling with sex what
should they do we know that people start
having sex again from when their kid is
about six and that's because what if
you're in a relationship right now and
you no longer found them attractive what
do I say I would
say it's absolutely crazy to me that so
many of you have decided to watch our
show um and so many of you have decided
to subscribe to our show we now have
five million subscribers on YouTube
which is a number that I just can't
comprehend and it's a dream that I
absolutely never could have had we
started the dire of a CO just over 3
years ago now and in my wildest
expectations we might have had 100,000
subscribers by now so you can imagine
how shocked I am that so many of you
have chosen to tune into these
conversations every week um and spend
some time with us so thank you and I
made a deal with you I made a deal that
if you subscribe to this show that we
would continue to raise the bar and in
2024 we're going to raise the bar like
never before I've been working for the
last nine months on a surprise for all
of you that have subscribed to the show
and I'm very excited to deliver that for
you the production is going to change
we're going to go even further with our
guests and we're going to tell even more
Global stories so as always if you
appreciate what we're doing here the
simple free favor I'll ask from you is
to hit the Subscribe button let's get on
with the
[Music]
episode Dr Karen gy
hi what you do and why' you do it I
spend my working week trying to change
people's relationships with sex and the
reason I do that is because although we
might think that sex is a kind of
frivolous recreational Pursuit it
actually isn't it's super important for
our psychological well-being for our
relationship well-being we know that
when people have great sex their
relationships last longer we know that
when people have great sex they're even
more productive in work than next day
there are so many reasons why sex is
important but unfortunately as a society
we've kind of got it all wrong about how
sex Works about what we should be doing
and because of that we have hugely High
rates of dissatisfaction with people's
sex lives in the UK but also worldwide
why did Sex take your fancy there's so
much about sex that's fascinating I
think there's loads we don't know um
there's loads we do know but no one
talks about people find it so hard to
talk about sex and it's so
stigmatized that you know when people
come into the room you can really see
the weight of it on their shoulders it's
hard for them to speak about it's
embarrassing for them and to be the
person that makes that feel comfortable
and to be the person that can create
change in a part of their life that
matters so much but is perhaps something
they've never told their closest friend
about is hugely rewarding you also get
to work with people across all ages so
you know from their teens to their '90s
you get to work with couples individuals
um you get everything with Sex Therapy I
love it since you started your work what
was almost what 20 years ago did you 20
what have you seen in terms
of changes in the problem set M that
you're dealing with now I what are the
new problems that you're you're
confronted with in your clinical
practice when couples or people come to
you yeah that's a good one because lots
of things have stayed the same right so
we we we know that for example problems
with desire Remain the most common
reason why people end up in my clinical
room um but lots of things have also
shifted data actually shows those shifts
over the last few decades so we have
long-term um data into the lives of um
people in the UK in terms of their sex
lives and we know that we're having less
sex this decade than we were the decade
before and the decade before that so the
amount of sex we're having for example
is going down from my clinical hunches
but also from what's been written about
in the research we have a good idea that
that's our pace of life our work life
balance our distractability our use of
devices um it's become evident in the
last kind of two decades that when it
comes to sex attention is a really key
part of it it's really key so being able
to pay attention to what's happening in
your body or being able to pay attention
to what's happening in your mind is
crucial but as a society I think we're
getting less and less able to pay
attention we're getting getting more and
more in pursuit of distraction and that
shows itself all the time in Sex Therapy
you know couples who come to see me
because they feel that they're never
having sex but yet when you look at
their week they actually have very
little time together and the time
together they do have they're both busy
scrolling they're watching Netflix and
scrolling they're perhaps doing three
things at once they're checking their
work emails that's taking them to a
whole new cognitive place of stress and
so it's no wonder that people don't have
space for their desire to emerge and
that's definitely a newer phenomenon it
kind of made me think of some of the
things I was reading about in your books
where you you say that couples and
individuals who do mindfulness practices
um are those that typically have the
most desire the I think the quote is
from your newest book which is the book
is called how not to let having kids
ruin your sex life yeah it's a bit of a
mouthful it's a it's a great great title
it says research tells us that women who
find easier to have orgasms are
typically more mindful in everyday life
and find it easier to be in the moment
during sex which is chapter three that's
right so there's an enormous amount of
data about attention and sex and
obviously one of the ways in which we
can sharpen our attention is mindfulness
we know that mindfulness Works across a
range of challenges that we face whether
it's pain management whether it's sleep
whether it's about apti regulation all
kinds of things but when it comes to sex
it's super powerful so when you're
distracted during sex um and we know
that over 90% of people have nonsexual
thoughts during sex okay so everyone
gets distracted we know that from the
research but what happens when we start
to get distracted most of the time or
when those distractions are what we call
cognitively Salient which means they're
worrying or they're particularly
stressful like oh I'm not going to calm
or what if I don't stay hard or is she
enjoying this those types of
distractions what happens is our
distraction is basically basically
turning down our arousal like turning
down the volume on the TV so it becomes
harder for our bodies to respond so to
stay aroused for example it becomes
harder for us to feel anything so our
pleasure is turned down it becomes
harder for us to come and ultimately
over time it gets in the way of our
desire on the contrary if we work on
that distraction either by trying to
remove them or trying to tackle the
worries that their root cause or trying
to promote our ability to pay attention
where we want it to be so that's sexual
thoughts sexual Sensations pleasure then
it's like turning up the volume and
we've seen plenty of research that
demonstrate the enormously powerful
impact of mindfulness on sexual response
I can think of times in my life where
because I was stressed or worried when I
got in bed I was worrying about
something or stressing about something
at work yeah my partner tried to have
sex with me and I had zero chance of
getting aroused I could not get an
erection and it's I remember those
moments and thinking oh God she's going
to think that it's about her but really
it's because of this thing I have on my
to-do list that's exactly right i' I'd
got in bed doing my to-do list so I I
like I was holding my to-do list and I
was doing it on my phone and I put the
phone down and then I lay back and I'm
still thinking about my to-do list and
then she tries to initiate and there's
zero chance that's it and that's also
exactly what we were talking about late
earlier on right which is that our
society has changed the way we work has
changed so perhaps three decades ago you
wouldn't have been checking your emails
just before bed which means that
wouldn't have started that Cascade of
thoughts about work which would then
perhaps Peak your cortisol your stress
levels and then cut off your ability to
get turned on so that is one of the
major things that has shifted for all of
us and I think you know one of the myths
that we you know would benefit from
quashing about sex is this idea that
particularly men are always up for it
are always ready to have sex it's just
not
true in fact everybody needs their kind
of conditions for good sex as I call it
to be right they need to be in the right
kind of headp space they need to be not
distracted um they need to know that the
environment is an environment that works
for them it's quite important so yeah
your experience is mirrors what a lot of
people are probably sat at home thinking
about just now do you think there's a
bit of a a paradox with sex in the sense
that the more you think about it mhm and
worry about it the harder it becomes yes
absolutely so what do you do just not
think about it and worry about like so
it's quite interesting because there's
also something else that happens when we
get turned on which is that we get this
attentional focused narrowing so one of
the features of physiological arousal so
so when blood flows around the body
particularly to the genitals is that we
know it kind of sharpens our attention
it makes us basically want to block out
the rest of the world and I'm sure we've
all had experiences when we've been
completely in the moment during sex when
we've not thought about a single other
thing that might be happening around us
so that attentional narrowing is great
unless your attention has been hijacked
by a worry because then you get
attentional narrowing on the worry MH
and what happens when we worry about
something is that it interferes with
sexual response in two main ways the
first is that it takes our attention
away from what's erotic and that turns
down the arousal and pleasure like we
talked about earlier on the TV um the
second thing that happens is that when
we worry about something that activates
our sympathetic nervous system sending
chemical messages around the body saying
don't have sex there's something to
worry about you know it can't tell the
difference between a modern day worry
like this email has come through that's
ruined my day versus you know a
saber-tooth tiger has just walked in you
know our brains are still primitive in
that regard so what happens is that
switches off our sexual response might
mean that you struggle to get turned on
it might mean that you struggle to feel
anything it might mean that your body
doesn't work in the way you want it to
and then of course the next time you go
into it what are you thinking you're
thinking what if it doesn't work you
talk a lot about expectations um and the
role that they play in sex expectation
and pressure make sex worse that's a
quote from your new book chapter 3 I
know maybe that's not a quote but that's
basically the gist of what it said um
but it's also the G gist of my
experience I think it's always felt to
me like the opposite of great sex is
expectation and like rigidity yes and
great sex for me is some sometimes
spontaneous but it's Carefree yes and
it's worry free yeah yeah I mean
pressure is a total passion killer but
pressure it's like that's again the kind
of compounding Paradox because the more
there's a problem with our sex the more
it becomes a focal point in our
relationship the more pressure the more
expectation every night you go to bed
you're thinking you know I've had
moments in past lives and past
relationships where because the sex
wasn't great I would feel nervous going
to bed because it was going to be one of
those moments where we kind of both are
sat there thinking about it but we're
not saying anything to each other and
then if I fall asleep I'm going to
disappoint them but if I try it's going
to go badly so what the hell do I do yes
pressure um is not good for our sex
lives and one of the challenges with
pressure is that when you think about
initiation it's often very much bound up
in pressure and perhaps we'll talk about
initiation in a second but actually the
foundation of those problems with
expectation and pressure is not being
able to talk about it okay because if
you think about it what we really want
to say is I'm feeling quite stressed
about the sex situation and the fact
that we don't talk about it means that
those things are hanging between us and
we know with sex that one of the
fascinating things about it is like
other ways in which we learn we learn
about sex by what we witness in the
media and what we pick up from social
learning something psychologists call
social learning theory when it comes to
sex we don't witness how anyone else is
doing it really we only see what happens
on TV and what happens in porn and maybe
hear from our friends but we don't
really know if they're telling the truth
or
not so what that means is we've all my
friends all lie about it yeah everyone
does they're all stallion in that now
I'm joking they're all very honest
there's actually a fascinating sex
research fact which is one of my
favorite facts which is that men uh when
they say the number of sexual partners
that they've had are more likely to
round it up to a zero or a five a number
ending in 05 I think that's a great sex
fact um so what that means then is is
that we're all living our sex lives
based on something we call sexual script
Theory this is a concept that
organically came out of the work of some
sex researchers in the 70s called gagnan
and Simon and they discovered that
actually in the absence of talking about
sex we all have quite set ideas about
what our sex lives should look like and
we've picked this up from uh from the
media from how people talk about sex in
popular culture and and how we've Ed
language what this means is that we have
a set of ideas and this includes things
like penis and vagina is the main cause
of sex and everything else isn't really
sex and language backs that up doesn't
it with the use of the word foreplay
kind of relegating any other type of sex
to less than and the use of the word
virginity which we only really use to
refer to penis and vagina sex so all of
these things tell us well that's what
real sex is and then you hear people
talking about that and backing that up
with things like well we did everything
but which is like we didn't have sex you
did have sex because you were sexual
together so what happens with these
sexual scripts is that they benefit us
to some degree because they reduce our
anxiety that's what sexual scripts are
there for to give us some idea of what's
expected but what they do to us in the
absence of communication is they give us
an idea about what we should be doing or
what someone else wants to do without us
having to talk about it which often
means that problems arise for examp one
of the examples you give in your book is
about orgasms yes and pornography giving
us a sexual script that men are
basically meant in a heterosexual
relationship men are meant to orgasm and
that there was some crazy stat from some
PornHub research yes yeah that's really
interesting research there was some
research that talked about depictions of
female pleasure and pleasure inducing
acts for women from the hund most
popular videos on PornHub and they found
that um women's pleasure was shown in
about 18% of those top hund videos and
men's pleasure or act that produce
pleasure for men mainly around penis and
vagina sex because that's men's most
favorite sexual act it's women's least
favorite sexual act that was depicted in
about 78% of cases so it's quite
interesting then when you think about
the fact that we're learning from what
we see because what does that then tell
us about what sex should look like about
when sex ends about whose pleasure is
prioritized and it's one of the reasons
that we have an orgasm Gap when men and
women have sex together because that's
how we learn about sex on that I just
want to pick up on two things you said
there that were really interesting to me
the first one was about us not talking
why we don't talk um it's very difficult
to talk about sex with your partner very
very difficult I've been there very
difficult because the plethora of
reasons why you might not be functioning
well or enjoying it can often sound like
you're blaming them communication is so
important we know that being able to
talk about sex is one of the most highly
correlated factors with long-term sexual
satisfaction and relationship
satisfaction and maintaining desire over
time it's more important than the amount
you have set
liking the same thing sexually it's so
important but it's so hard to do and we
know why it's hard right it's because
we're not socialized to talk about it
we're not often given the words that
feel comfortable we are out of practice
getting those words out of our mouth so
they feel kind of clumsy and
awkward there's a lot of worry and risk
involved what if I say this and they
don't like it and because of that it's
easier to avoid but the most fascinating
thing about about sex I think is that
it's constantly evolving for us so you
and I we're not the same people sexually
than we were when we were 15 16 and we
won't be the same sexual people in
another 10 15 years than we are now so
we need to be able to have the ability
for growth right growth and flex in our
sexual relationships but how do you do
that if you can't talk about it it's a
bit like going to the hairdressers same
hairdresses for the rest of your life
and every you sit down not saying
anything and just hoping that they'll
give you the haircut that you want you
wouldn't do it right and they
continually give you the bad you one and
you just keep coming back and you say
thanks and you tip them and you go so we
need to get better at talking about it
and it's not easy it's easy for me I
talk about it all day every day but I
know that that's not the norm and part
of the work that I do is to try and help
people try and give people the scaffold
to talk about it and I can talk you
through that if you like please so it
might be that the best place to start is
to find out how people find talking
about challenging topics anyway with
their partner so if you can't talk about
other things outside of sex without it
going into an argument then it might be
worth just looking at communication full
stop forget sex for the moment just talk
about that are you creating some like
Rules of Engagement for how we
communicate you listen I express myself
absolutely and I always recommend the
Gans um I don't know if you know their
work I do yeah um I recommend them
because they have some great resources
around General communication it's
important to have a good basis if you're
going to talk about sex but if people
can talk about other things and they
find it relatively easy to hear each
other and to share their kind of hopes
and fears then it might be useful to
start to create a culture where talking
about sex becomes the norm this is
always the place you want to end up
right we all want to end up with a
relationship culture that supports easy
communication about sex that's the
guaranteed route to sexual satisfaction
and to do that we have to make it
something that we do frequently without
any pressure without any expectation
that something big has to change so an
early way to start that might be for
example to bring in some novelty in your
Communications about sex so people might
be listening to this podcast and they
might say oh how was your day today
great oh I heard this thing on Diary of
a CEO podcast and it was about
depictions of pleasure in porn and I
thought it was really interesting and it
occurred to me we don't talk about porn
much you know is that something you'd be
open to talk about whether you watch it
whether you like it what you like that
might feel too much for some people and
it might be I heard a podcast about sex
and it talked about the importance of
talking and I thought we don't do that
much so there's ways of bringing it in
which are saying look this I think would
be good for us the key point is stating
the impact that you think it will have
so I would like like to talk more about
this because I heard it means you can
guarantee great sex for the rest of your
life so I think that would be good for
us you know I'm committed to this
relationship I want our sex to stay
great this might be awkward for us but
can we do it so the starting point if
you're nervous is always to talk about
things outside of your sexual
relationship things you've heard on
podcasts films you saw with good sex
scenes in them bring things in rather
than talking about the two of you after
that if you get good at that it might be
worthwhile talking about your own sex
when it goes well so a good time to do
this is after sex that's gone well or at
another time when you're feeling really
emotionally connected maybe you're out
for dinner maybe you're having a weekend
away and talk about what you really
liked and why okay so don't talk about
it when it's bad no no not at this stage
not at this stage if you feel confident
with that and you get into a habit of
talking about sex talking about what's
gone well talking about sex as if if
it's any other topic of conversation
like business or exercise or Diet then
you might want to start to talk about
things you'd like to be different and in
an idal world I try and encourage
couples to have a kind of regular
practice of this so if you think about
your goals for your exercise your work
your diet often you'll set yourself
goals right and you might tell your
partner about them you know in six
months from now I want to do this or
this year I'm working on this it's quite
good to get into the habit of saying
where do we want our sex life to go how
would we like things to be what do we
want to continue what do we want more of
and what do we want less of and that's a
really positive conversation you don't
need to talk about what you don't like
you're talking about what you want more
of instead what if the issue in your
sexual relationship is one of Attraction
and I I've asked a few guests this
because I think it's one of the the
hardest challenges to overcome and I
don't know in a clinical setting what
you would say if you're sat there with
an individual and they're telling you
that the reason they aren't having sex
with Dave right now is because they're
no longer attracted to them what what is
their path forward there do they dump
Dave or do they go tell Dave it depends
how important sex is to them if it's
important say it's important and for
them a relationship they're in a
monogamous relationship so they can't
get sex elsewhere or they've agreed to
not get sex elsewhere and is important
then it's quite important that
attraction is part of it um we know that
the sex science tells us that when
attraction is high at the beginning it's
really easy to maintain desire over time
when attraction is low it can be really
challenging It's Not Unusual for me to
see couples who've been together decades
with very low levels of Attraction but
the work they need to do to maintain a
sex life that works for them both is
tough so so you need to kind of have
your eyes open I guess about what you're
signing up for if sex is important to
you then attraction is fairly important
I think it's also maybe useful to say
that attraction can work some Wayne and
it might be worth examining what's going
on there and whether you know there is a
certain situation that you find
yourselves in as a couple or whether
they're at the moment going through some
stuff that maybe makes it harder for you
to see them in that light yeah sometimes
attraction can come back when those
relationship contexts are worked on but
if it's never been there from the outset
if it's a very strong sense of a lack of
Attraction if someone's eyes have
already moved to someone else then it
may be useful to address it and
attraction's not just a physical thing
people think of Attraction as being
physical it's a psychological thing as
well absolutely absolutely and you know
attraction can vary in relationships
depending on what's happening in the
relationship Dynamic so a common thing
that I've written about in the new book
it's to book for parents really is
around the dynamic of what it feels like
to have a partner who feels like a
another child so the idea that you might
be having to care for them as well you
know make their lunches kind of buy
their clothes um tidy up after them that
we know from sex research that's a super
unsexy Dynamic and that is something
which often falls on women in straight
relationships once kids arrive and that
kind of dynamic can shift attraction and
may well shift back if that Dynamic is
addressed so your new book is called how
not to let having kids ruin your sex
life that's right why did you title it
that I just thought let's say what it is
and that's exactly what it is it's a
guide to not let having kids ruin your
sex life does that tend to happen kids
so oh yeah so it's so common sexual
dissatisfaction is that it's lowest for
couples in the period after having kids
so if you've got an under five-year-old
at home it's pretty likely that your sex
life is suffering for it it doesn't have
to but many of the kind of reasons why
our sex life struggles when kids come
along are um amplifications of dynamics
that we struggle with outside of kids so
for example quite often but of course
not always people are in a long-term
relationship quite often they're living
together being in a long-term
relationship and living together are two
factors which reduce your desire over
time so you've already you're already
starting from that point you may have
also been trying to conceive you might
have had problems with fertility with
miscarriage sex might have got boring
but you might have had to do it anyway
you've then got pregnancy which for some
people is a golden time of sexual
exploration but for some people means
for one reason or another they don't
have much sex and then you're expecting
to get back to your sexual life when
you've getting no sleep when you're
stressed and when you've got another
kind of 37 40 hours of work a week to do
which is the parenting week so there's
so many reasons why it's challenging and
that's why I wrote the book is there a a
certain demographic of person that
you're most likely to see in your
clinical practice and is it is it
parents I see people of all ages I see I
probably see people mostly in long-term
relationships I think people know that
desire is my specialist subject so
people tend to seek me out particularly
around desire um I see a lot of parents
I also see a lot of non-parents but you
know Parenthood brings additional child
Alles for people to navigate even if you
think about the time available to have
sex it's much more limited it can be
really difficult to initiate when you
initiate it the other person might
experience it as a really clumsy
initiation when they've got a lot on
their plate these are all just as I said
amplifications of what you might get in
long-term relationships generally but it
tends to be the more challenging wedge
of the
pie desire this idea of Desire is really
fascinating to me I actually speak to
one of my best friends about
um what we call Desire management and it
was a theory that we developed based on
just looking at both of our lives and
how we' manag to maintain sexual desire
in our respective relationships he has
an approach to dating which we all laugh
at him for where he meets someone and he
moves them in really really quickly like
moves them in it's a very like
smothering approach to like finding Love
and Desire very quickly goes out the
window whereas I'm probably the opposite
of that where in my current relationship
with it was a longdistance relationship
for 2 years she lived on the other side
of the world eventually in maybe year
three or something we like moved in
together but we're still we still both
fly all over the world so we don't see
each other much which I think is proven
to be quite Central to our desire
management we don't see each other much
and that's that's the theory of Desire
management keep some distance keep keep
the right amount of distance there's
probably absolutely there's probably two
too far away and too in frequently
seeing them and then there's seeing them
too much absolutely it's a great Theory
so desire is possibly one of the most
fascinating aspects of sex that is
grossly misunderstood by our kind of
collective psyche and it's quite
interesting because if you ask most
people um on the street how desire works
or what desire is they'll tell you that
we have such a thing as a sex drive or
libido which kind of comes into our mind
and tells us it would be a good idea to
have sex that is an idea that came from
sex science in the 50s and 60s when we
believed that desire was the first part
of the sexual response cycle so you you
first had the idea to be sexual and then
you acted on it and that's kind of
seeped down into our Collective psyche
and that's how we all operate our sex
lives we generally wait to feel like it
and then we act on it but actually we
now know that desire doesn't work like
that and that in the early stages of a
relationship or if we live apart there's
your desire management we manage to
maintain higher levels of that kind of
Desire it's called spontaneous desire
and it happens when a partner is novel
or less familiar to us or perhaps when
our Dynamic with them isn't diluted by
other roles so for your friend that
moves someone in that person then
becomes a
flatmate so that the role of them as a
sexual partner is diluted for other
people it's diluted also by being a
co-parent so our brain starts to see
that person less as a sexual object
this is an inevitable part of being with
someone for a number of years and we can
pretty much guarantee that for most
people spontaneous desire will start to
decline about a year or 18 months into a
relationship obviously it depends how
often you see each other and it sounds
like your desire management fantastic
might keep that going a bit longer for
most people they have this experience
and we know that this happens for
everyone but that women struggle to
maintain this more than men so in the UK
we know that 34% of women and 15% of men
are worried that they don't feel like
sex enough and that's because they've
seen a drop in the spontaneous desire we
talked about sexual scripts earlier and
we talked about how we learn about sex
from what we see the way desire is
represented to us in the media is lust
passion
spontaneity that sexual urge that you
absolutely have to act on and yes that
is how it works for some of us some of
the time perhaps after we've not seen
each other for a long time perhaps at
the start of a relationship and for some
people you know lifelong with the same
person but it's not the norm actually
what the norm is is that that type of
Desire tends to diminish and it's other
motivations other than horniness that
we're seeking out through sex so we call
these nonsexual motivations and there
may be things like wanting to feel close
stress relief wanting to feel desire
ired um wanting to demonstrate love or
affection wanting to have fun um out of
a sense of obligation because it's been
a while these are all nonsexual
motivations which lead us to the
behavior of
sex the problem is a lot of people are
waiting to feel like it before they act
on it and for those people they're
waiting a really long time we know that
for women particularly uh it should be
considered normal to never feel like sex
out of the blue with your long-term
partner never how do we know that from
sex research so when we ask women how
often do you feel like sex with your
partner they say either never or maybe
once or twice a month this is
spontaneous
desire but we're asking the question
about only one type of Desire responsive
desire is desire that emerges out of us
beginning sexual activity or or having
what we call sexual stimuli in front of
us a passionate kiss a flirtation being
naked together um a text that suggests
something that we might do later
on the later versions of sex research
tell us that actually desire emerges out
of being sexual okay so it comes from
doing something to trigger it but if
your understanding of Desire is that you
should wait until you feel like it
there's a large proportion of people in
longterm relationships that are just
never feeling like it and never doing
anything about it what we need to do
instead is be aware that our desire can
be triggered and find ways to trigger it
and have a relationship context that
supports triggering it in that context
we know that people's desire works
perfectly well that means they can have
desire feature as much as they want in
their relationship just by knowing how
desire works so our brains code things
as sexual and this could be physical
touch it could be kiss it could be being
naked together it could be the sight of
someone's naked body it could be a
suggestive text it's different for
everybody but essentially sexual content
triggers our arousal which triggers our
desire it's the reason why the most
common thing people say to me in Sex
Therapy is I didn't really feel like it
but we had sex and it was great and
afterwards I said why don't we do that
more that's responsive desire it emerges
out of sexual activity the problem of
long-term relationships is that we see a
decline in what I call sexual currency
so how we relate to each other as sexual
beings we start to see sex a bit like an
onoff switch so we're either having sex
or the rest of the time we're not being
sexual together you know we're not
passionately kissing unless it's part of
sex we're not sending each other those
flirty messages we us to do at the
beginning we're not spending time
lounging around in bed on a Sunday
morning being naked together in a way
that might kickstart
desire so these low levels of sexual
currency and these high levels of
familiarity seeing the same person every
day means our brains just don't code
them as sexual stimuli in the same way
and then we go cheat or we go look for
porn or something else yeah absolutely
because we want to have that kind of
frison of excitement can I just clarify
that sexual currency this definition
basically means if I think this of this
in a financial context
if you see someone as being highly
sexually desirable they have a high
sexual currency in your mind not quite
okay so think currency more like charge
oh okay like a thatp yeah so sexual
currency my definition of it would be
it's everything that you do that marks
you out as a sexual couple apart from
having sex so this is the stuff that you
wouldn't do with your friends you
wouldn't do with your family you
wouldn't do with your kids so you're
physically affectionate with all those
people right M but the seual side of it
the passionate kissing the bum grabs the
flirtation the saying you look super hot
in that top these things are sexual
currency so if we think about our sex
lives not as this onoff switch of the
you know 18 minutes that's the average
for men and women when they have sex
together it's 18 minutes of having sex
however often you're doing it if you
think of your sexual relationship as
something which is always happening
something which you're always nurturing
you can imagine the power that that can
have on both triggering desire but also
Meeting those sexual needs I'll give you
an example that I wrote about in the new
book actually um because parents
obviously have limited time available to
have sex and raising sexual currency is
one of the ways you can increase sexual
satisfaction even when you can't have
any more sex so if you think about an
example of um a straight couple whereby
he is feeling that her lack of interest
in sex means that she doesn't desire him
as much as she used to and he's worried
about that because for him that means
the relationship is in crisis uh she
might look elsewhere and also he doesn't
feel so good about himself he wants to
feel desired we all do right he gave me
an example of a time when they perhaps
attended a function and they were in the
lift and as they went up in the lift to
get to this function she pushed him
against the lift and kissed him really
passionately for the 10 seconds they
were in the lift and then they got out
the lift and They carried on with the
function
this is sexual currency and that made
him feel more desired more connected to
her sexually than a week before the sex
they had that felt like going through
the motions so you've got something
which meets your sexual needs which
makes you feel desired attractive close
like a sexual couple like you've got
some sexual secret between you that no
one else can see sexual currency does
all of that but it also acts as
scaffolding to help us move easily into
sex because we talked about expect
expectation and pressure earlier and if
you have high levels of sexual currency
there's low pressure for it to go
anywhere because it is your sexual
relationship for its own right it's not
someone initiating sex the way to
overcome this potential psychological
barrier is to create a culture of low
pressure between you you say that sex
should be trivial and often not rare and
crucial absolutely yeah soal and often I
always know that my work with couples is
done when they find it really easy to
invite each other into sex and really
easy to turn each other down because
what happens when uh we have low levels
of sexual currency and when sex has
become an issue is that everything's
riding on initiation so the person
initiating Waits they they ignore all
the other times they want to initiate it
because it's quite stressful and they
wait until the time it really matters
maybe it's an anniversary or a weekend
away or something where it feels like
you should have sex and they initiate it
and there's so much riding on it that
the other person knows there's so much
writing on it they feel pressure
pressure is a desire killer it doesn't
happen and then the initiation will be
even rarer moving forward more pressure
for more pressure exactly what we want
instead is a kind of trivial and often
way of sexually relating high levels of
sexual currency high levels of
initiation so you find it easy to say to
your partner by the way at work today I
was thinking about doing this to you
when when we get home and your partner
can say that sounds really hot if only I
didn't have this meeting tomorrow on my
mind let's come back to that on the
weekend so you can let somebody know
that sex is on your mind you can invite
someone into something which might be a
passionate kiss might be let's go to bed
early and talk about our day knowing
that that is sexual stimuli which might
trigger arousal and desire but also it
acts as a way of
triggering that um initiation it makes
it easy to initiate if you're doing it
often and if there's low pressure do you
think you should schedule sex no never
ever schedule sex cuz you said let's
come back to on the weekend I was
thinking that's just ruin the weekend
I'd like to I like it to be spicy and
spontaneous so um it's one of our sexual
scripts that sex spontaneous sex is
better and I don't necessarily agree
with that but I do agree with the idea
that scheduling sex just creates
pressure for everyone how can you in
advance agree to something that you
don't know if you're going to feel like
when you get there and all that does is
create pressure what you should do
though in today's day and age is
schedule physical intimacy schedule some
type of sexual currency because we're so
busy if you don't do that when is it
going to happen the issue I have though
is if I schedule physical intimacy MH
then okay and I keep doing that
eventually the expectation comes in that
we have sex after the physical intimacy
it's also the same thing with like date
night if you're parents and you get one
date night a week we all know when we
need to get this we need to make this
thing happen so it becomes scheduling
sex because you're scheduling date night
once a week you know what I mean yeah so
you've got two options haven't you one
is that you wait until it's really high
pressure and you don't initiate it very
often you wait for this date night I
don't know once a week once a month and
everyone knows there's all kinds of
stuff riding on it and that makes it
possibly the worst set of circumstances
to for everyone to feel like sex lots of
high pressure sex that might feel
formulaic everyone's distracted means
they can't get into it it's not great
sex the other option is that you keep
high levels of sexual currency and you
try your best to schedule brief moments
of physical intimacy which could act as
scaffolding to take it further you're
right in that you may start to build up
an expectation that oh every time we say
we'll have a bath together we end up
having sex that might happen but when
you invite someone into the bath you are
inviting them into the bath right so
you're not inviting them saying let's
have a bath and have sex afterwards
you're saying do you fancy having a bath
together the fact that you both know
where the bath might lead is fine
because it allows you to get into that
head space Oh okay I hadn't thought
about sex tonight but the bath might
lead to sex so let me get into a sexual
head space for a minute so that's quite
useful the problem comes when you say to
them afterwards you said you wanted a
bath and we've not had sex well that
wasn't what you invited them into you
invited them into the B so you have to
be okay if it doesn't lead to that but
if you initiate these types of things
more if you think about it scattergun
approach more of them are likely to go
where you want them to go versus that
one time of high pressure if you were to
give me a couple of pieces of simple
advice on how to keep desire high in my
relationship what would you say I would
say kiss more kiss for kissing's sake
okay kiss kissing often falls off the
agenda in longterm
relationships the number of times I see
that um with couples I'm working with
who've been together decades they only
kiss as part of sex or as initiation of
sex so kissing is a great way of
triggering Desire it's also a great way
of getting our sexual needs met so that
would be one the second would be you
have to make time to schedule physical
intimacy of some type because remember
that desire is triggered by that kind of
sexual stimul whether it's um getting
naked on the couch and watching film
together that you know it's got good sex
scenes in it whether it's massage
whether it's the bath whether it's um
some kind of date night that involves
use of your bodies without that there
are no triggers to your desire so you're
just kind of waiting to feel it the
third is understand how desire works
it's drastically different than what
you've been sold and you're normal if
you struggle to get in the head space
sometimes what about distance and you
know this idea of like you talked about
how they kind of your partner can lose
their sexual currency if they become a
carer or you know I've heard before if
they become like too much of a mom or a
dad in your mind and they stop becoming
a sort of sexual partner relationship
Dynamics are quite fascinating U as you
say because when we talk about them we
often hear things like well obviously if
you're experiencing great amount of
relationship conflict it's going to
affect your sex life I mean that's of
course right we all know that to be true
but actually it's the subtle dyam
dynamics that are quite important it's
um having distance from each other and
being able to bring in novelty and
newness a bit like you do with kind of
having that that physical distance but
it's also an emotional separation isn't
it because you're having experiences
separately and then coming back together
to talk about them it's also about what
roles you might get typ cast into in
your relationship so something I talk
about often is the idea that when we
have sex with the same person for a long
time we can start to feel as though
there's only one way for us to be
sexually and that's the way they're kind
of expecting us to be so it can feel
quite suffocating and sometimes that's
the reason that people go outside of a
monogamous relationship is because they
want to experience themselves
differently they want to be a different
person sexually and because they can't
talk to their partner about that and
they feel typ cast in that Dynamic you
know you're the dominant one I'm not or
um the sex that we have is really kind
of sensual and caring and I want it to
be passionate and
animalistic it's really difficult you
must come across so many couples in um
your clinical practice that have two
different visions of what sex should
look like yes fantasies fetishes you
know this one wants this person to do
this to me but this person thinks that's
you know horrific MH how does one bridge
the gap and how does one go about even
communicating those things because I
imagine so many people in so many
relationships it's kind of like what you
said earlier having really bad haircuts
having really bad sex and I saying
nothing about it and oh yeah I've been
in relationships before where I've
thought you know what I really want to
do that but I think she'll think that
I'm a little bit you know trust me no
one is talking about it everyone stays
silent and just hopes that the other
person will either get the hint or will
accidentally stumble upon the thing they
really want them to do it is fascinating
really when you think about it because
so much of our satisfaction our life
satisfaction depends on how sex goes but
we just almost leave it to Chance by not
talking about it one of the things we
might do in Sex Therapy is by getting
people separately to write down what
their perfect sex looks like um I have a
um an exercise it's actually free you
can find it on my social media or my
website which is called conditions for
good sex which guides people through the
process of doing that and it looks at
three main areas one is psychological
arousal what turns you on in your head
what kind of dynamic between you and the
person works for you how do you need to
feel about yourself and your Optimum
sexual experience one is physical
stimulation and that could be anything
from where you like to be touched to the
types of sex you like to um the type of
positions you like to be in the third is
being able to be in the moment so you
might right there the kinds of things
that go through your mind to distract
you and I would get people to do that
separately um the way I guide people
through that is by getting them to think
about their three best sexual
experiences and really replay those in
their mind what were the aspects of that
sexual experience which you play over
and over again what was it about how you
felt about yourself about how you could
be with that person what was it about
what you were doing what was it about
the environment and people are able to
then develop their own perspective their
own um list if you like of the things
that really work for
them what if your partner says I don't
like it well that's what we come to next
then we look for the overlap so is there
overlap if there's not then there's a
little bit of work to do right are you
going to stay in a monogamous
relationship and if so how are you going
to make this work are you going to open
it up so you can get your sexual needs
met elsewhere plenty of people do that
often there is enough overlap for people
to say okay I didn't realize that that
was a thing for you I don't I like that
thing but maybe not quite to that degree
can we do this instead so there's a
little bit of negotiation that happens
in the middle but I think perhaps one of
the myths around our sexuality is that
it exists between us and our partner and
actually our sexuality just exists
within us alone and we should be allowed
to express that alone or in our minds in
whatever way that we want and that could
look quite different what we do alone
perhaps with others to what we do with
another person so we don't have to get
all of our sexual needs met by that one
person there may be other ways of doing
it should we remain open-minded to the
um desires and requests of the other I I
remember you know I like experimenting
you know and I think I was once upon a
time with someone who was less Keen to
experiment and I remember think oh this
is boring this is going to be really
boring and then over time I think I was
able to introduce things slowly that
open their eyes to experimentation and
they love they love experimentation we
had the best sex of Our Lives okay
because we introduced things we
experimented more but um I I remember
reflecting in that moment that I could
have easily walked away from the
relationship when this person said oh no
that's weird I don't want to do that
yeah and it may be that if this other
person had done their conditions for
good sex they may have written down
under the psychological arousal part I
really need to know someone or I really
need to trust someone before I can do
things that are outside of the normal
sexual script right sense and
experimentation could be part of that um
I think it also comes down to how you
want the kind of personality of your sex
life together to be so I think for some
of us um experiencing kind of thrill or
joy or pushing boundaries or
experimentation in sex is a key part of
what really tis ticks us along what
really keeps us going for other people
it's just not it's it's that they want
sex to be predictable um intimate fun
but close without anything outside of
the ordinary so I think it can be quite
useful to think about what do we see as
the sexual personality of our
relationship how do we how do we want it
to be what would make us feel most alive
and that's where creat a culture of
talking about sex is helpful because
without that how do you know earlier you
used a phrase you said it's when we were
talking about vaginal um penetration you
said it's women's least favorite act yes
it is yeah so we talked about sexual
scripts um penis and vagina sex being
the main course of sex is very much a
dominant sexual script and there are
many reasons that's dominant and it's
something that we know from sex research
that if you ask people and they have
done many times in sex research to
recount what sex looks like people will
recount a set menu of sex that is you
start with this then you do a bit of
that then you go to the main course of
penis and vagina sex um the kind of
American audience will know that as a
kind of baseball analogy and I think
worldwide we know that analogy too right
that's how we see how sex should be but
what's Most Fascinating about that is
that suits men's Anatomy more than
women's we know that the majority of
women about 80% um don't orgasm from
penetrative sex because obviously it's
all about the clitoris and so that's why
for women their most favorite sexual
acts are things like people using their
hands to stimulate their clitoris or
receiving oral sex not penis and vagina
sex they rate rate that the least
pleasure inducing sexual
act for men it's different it's the
highest pleasure inducing sexual act
right alongside masturbation actually
what's f fascinating is we talk a lot
about desire particularly between men
and women when they have sex together
but we don't always talk about the fact
that to move towards sex we have to be
motivated to feel that there's going to
be a reward and so when we're having sex
that perhaps doesn't suit our anatomy as
much as we'd like it to or when there's
a big orgasm Gap and someone else is
reliably experiencing more pleasure than
we are of course our desire
suffers does it we've used the word
initiate a lot does it matter who
initiates
it doesn't matter but we know that the
person initiating often experiences
higher levels of sexual satisfaction in
the encounter than the person who's
following there are some really
interesting things with initiation and I
actually think that when it comes to sex
with long-term Partners when it comes to
many of the couples that I see people
often walk through the door saying
there's a problem with desire sometimes
there is it's usually in their
understanding of Desire not desire
itself but often it's an initiation
actually because if you think about it
initiation is a
communication you're basically saying
I'd like to have sex now would you and
there are a variety of ways that people
initiate and in my experience they can
be wildly off theark so one scenario is
that the person initiates and it's so
subtle that the other person just
doesn't pick up on it at all and it's
quite difficult to put yourself out
there with initiation right so people
test the waters with this coded subtle
I'll put my hands there and and they'll
know what that means and often that is
completely missed by the other person
and so the opportunity for sex is
lost the other side of the coin is when
people initiate in a really direct way
so um we know that women having sex with
men initiate much more directly and when
men are initiating with women or when
women are initiating with women they
initiate much more indirectly so this
direct initiation from women to men
often looks like should we have sex
then do you fancy a shag that kind of
thing which although it's direct and you
could give it points for being direct
communication people say that all the
time time all the time they say it it's
direct it's getting a point across but
it's inherently
unsexy and it's quite interesting
because the social script of men are
always up for sex means that in women's
Minds often they can just say that and
that will do it for their partner yeah
and actually that's not the case and
what we know from research is that most
men actually say I need a bit more than
that I need to feel intimacy I need to
feel desired I need to feel as though
she's initiating it because she's
enthusiastic about doing it not because
she's doing it for me we also know that
people fall into styles of initiation
and just in the same way that I
mentioned getting typ cast around how
you are sexually with a partner you can
get typ cast in terms of how you
initiate so there might be one way that
you do it always the same always and
maybe it was cute for the first six
months but in month 60 it starts to
become quite irritating it starts to
become not a sexual trigger but oh here
we go again yeah unsexy it's kind of
like yeah predictable yeah pressure so
it can be a really useful thing to have
a conversation with somebody else
somebody you're having sex with around
how you actually like sex to be
initiated and whether that matches with
how each other does it you know what's
interesting when we think about sex and
what we assume it must be like we all
have a bit of an idea in our head maybe
from pornography or something else or
movies that it should just flow yes that
it should just you know and so when our
sex doesn't flow we think something is
broken and wrong with it m we should we
just walk in hi babe how's work oh off
we go we're off to the like every day
and it should happen every every other
night um and if it's not flowing and
happening every other night we think we
need to go and like yeah you know fix
this someone's to blame something's
wrong with me or him or so let's come
back to frequency because that's a big
one but before we get on to
that occupying the space in between
willingness so that's a nice idea that
I've had or you've had but I'm not there
yet and desire when your desire kicks in
is actually quite an uncomfortable space
to occupy and one of the things I like
to do in in my work with people is to
try and help them get comfortable in
that space because as you say we have
this idea that we should be feeling it
before we start that's wrong we know
that now but also that it should be easy
for us just to slip into that sexual
head space to lose that awkwardness to
lose that sense of I don't actually know
if I'm going to feel like it I might do
can we just continue what we're doing
and I'll see occupying that space in
between willingness and desire is really
a key part of initiation because if you
initiate with shall we have sex it
doesn't really give you a chance to see
if you can occupy that space does it you
have either have to say yes or no do you
know think it's harder for men as well
in some regards because like we got to
get you know the Eiffel Tower up in in
in a heteros sexual relationship there's
like it's very easy to see if the man is
aroused whereas it's less obvious I mean
it is there's ways to tell obviously yes
without getting too detailed but it's
it's so clear if the man is aroused
there's no hiding it for all of us our
body's arousal response and the degree
with which we're turned on in our minds
so desire don't actually always match as
much as we'd like them to so I don't
know if you've ever had this experience
or any of your listeners have but it can
be quite common for men to want to be
getting in a sexual head space or
actually be feeling desire but not be
hard and because it's a visual sign
sometimes their Partners whether they're
male or female Partners can take that
really personally MH what does that mean
about me I I'm going to be honest
because that's the whole point of this
podcast was I've had multiple times in
my life where I've not been able to get
an erection and uh it's so awward and
it's the minute they realize that you
you're not going to be able to get an
erection
what do I say you know what do I say
yeah I'm so glad you mentioned it
because it's so common and it's common
because this is called arousal
non-concordance so an idea that our
bodies don't always do what our brains
are thinking so you might think you want
to have sex but your body doesn't always
respond and that happens for people of
all genders it's just more challenging
for people with penises right because
you can see it that's I'm saying yeah so
it brings with it that extra level of
pressure as soon as you've got that
pressure then as we know your attention
goes elsewhere your worry increases that
turns down arousal like turning down the
tv less chance of inter rection so can I
ask then what do I do in that moment and
what should they do as in like how do
they help me in that very embarrassing
moment and what do I say yeah so they
first need to understand that no
erection doesn't mean that you don't
want to have sex it might sometimes of
course but if you're saying look I'm I'm
really Keen for this I'm just not there
yet then they need to take that at face
value okay that's really important
otherwise you end up feeling as though
it's a judgment on your attraction or
your desire for them which it's not um
the second thing
is there needs to be less focus on the
need for the penis to be hard and that
comes from delineating this idea of this
set menu of sex which means a hard penis
has to be part of it there's plenty of
other things that you could do sexually
if you're feeling like you want to be
sexual which will move your attention
back to sexual things things that might
really turn you on so for example giving
oral sex is often something that a lot
of men say really turn them on obviously
it's not for everyone vibrator out yeah
all kinds of things watching someone
else's sexual pleasure can really turn
us on for some people it's really hard
for them to get used to um enjoying
sensation when their penis is soft they
they kind of want to avoid it be great
if they didn't and they could be
comfortable with enjoying that touch
even then but it might mean moving
moving your attention to another person
what usually happens then is that at
some point it comes back MH but it only
comes back if you don't worry about it
and if you don't put pressure on it that
has to be not just about you it has to
be about the person you're with as well
because you know if they're oh never
mind then we'll just do it another time
okay so that's really interesting so the
foundation of all of that though is
communication absolutely because without
that if if I go flatted and then I don't
say anything about it and I just lay
there like dormant and then she's laying
there dormant and then we try and go to
sleep and then we never address we never
get to communicate cuz maybe I did want
to have sex but maybe for some reason my
to-do list was still on my mind exactly
and notice that the Assumption behind it
is that the sex that you're going to
have is penis and vagina penetration is
that even what she wants and if we could
initiate sex in a way that was clearer
if we could say to our partners easily
um and really horny what I'd really like
to do is X and it all be about me are
you up for that that's quite different
if we're able to be clear about that
what would that do to your confidence
with your actions does that make sense
if she'd actually gone into that sexual
encounter saying you know what all I
want you to do is make me come I'm I'm
I'm not I not feel like penetrative sex
tonight if she'd felt confident to say
that I can guarantee there would have
been no problem with the erection the
erection would have come as part of it
because the whole process would have
been arousing this is a bit of a left
field one but I just remembered a debate
me and my friends had in our little like
mates
chat is it better to have sex before or
after you eat because he was like oh no
I this I thought this was weird he was
like I have sex before we go on the date
I'm like what you have sex before the
day he was like yeah no sex after no sex
after food that is a good idea to be
fair a lot of people say they struggle
really when they're full they feel quite
unsexy they feel a bit lethargic they
feel a bit bloated they don't feel great
about their body perhaps um a lot of
people do that if they're going to have
a date night I mean I never like date
nights because I think by the time you
get home from a date night you've maybe
had a bit to drink you've maybe had a
bit to eat it's maybe quite late it's
not the best conditions for having sex
actually I'd rather if you had a date
night you kept it on fun emotional
connection relationship satisfaction and
then you plan an in at home date night
that's more about physical intimacy okay
do you know what I mean because it's not
it's not that easy to do the two so your
friend's probably right probably before
food is better but you want to come back
to frequency sure yeah because we talked
about that earlier and this is one of
the big myths that people talk about
around sex life which is that the amount
of sex that you have matters and it
really
doesn't so what I mean by that is that
if you ask most people how often they
should be having sex a week I mean what
do you think they would say your friends
or people on the street how much they
should be having sex yeah a week a month
how much do you think they'd say three
times a week everyone says three times a
week really it's this kind of urban myth
that again forms part of our sexual
scripts if we're not having sex three
times a week there's a problem it's
actually drastically different than that
the average times people in in the UK
and actually it's kind of replicated
around the world but what's fascinating
is that we're using frequency as a yard
stick of a good sex life and there is no
correlation between the fre frequency of
sex and sexual satisfaction none
whatsoever so you're saying it's quality
over quantity absolutely you could be
having sex you know once a year that
completely blows your socks off makes
you feel alive makes you feel super
connected um that's really exploratory
where you lose yourself in it and that
is better than having sex once a day
where you're not enjoying it your mind's
not in it it's not pleasurable you're
feeling disconnected you're feeling
awkward so it's so interesting that we
get so hung up on frequency in fact the
average amount of times people are
having sex in the UK If people are
interested is around about three times a
month but there is huge amount of
variation there so plenty of people in
relationships that haven't had sex for
months and I'm quite happy with that and
plenty of people having sex more but I
think having that average is quite
useful to talk about because actually
it's a it's quite surprisingly different
to how most people perceive it should be
over 40% of women want to be having more
sex than they are currently having which
is in chapter two of this book in front
of me mind the gap MH what about men so
women are women want to be having over
40% of them want to be having more sex
than they're currently having yeah
there's there's huge levels of sexual
dissatisfaction for people of all
genders everyone wants to be having more
sex better sex than they're currently
having we know that for women it's
around about what just over half of
women 52% and for men it's about 42% are
unhappy with the sex lives that they
have enormous numbers that's UK data
15,000 adults between the ages men are
typically more satisfied yeah and I
suggest that the reason for that is that
although men experience challenges with
desire as well men find it easier on
average to maintain desire for the same
person and as we've already talked about
women struggle to access their
spontaneous desire and label that as a
problem when it's not you know I'm aware
we're talking very much about straight
couples because that's where we see the
majority of sexual problems but when we
talk about men and women having sex
together we also see that orgasm Gap so
we see less pleasure and less reward for
women which I think accounts for that
slightly higher number so you said
something in between there that was
curious to me just to confirm over
long-term relationships the man is more
likely to maintain their desire for the
woman in a heterosexual relationship
that's right the woman is more likely to
lose desire for her partner that's right
and we're talking here remember about
spontaneous desire okay okay is that
remember there there the responsive
desire we talked about earlier and we
know that this is the interesting bit
when it comes to women's desire it's
actually much more easier to trigger
with a wide range of sexual stimuli than
men's so women's responsive desire works
brilliantly you could say it works even
better than men's so spontaneous desire
is only one type of Desire it's that
feeling of out of the blue lust
horniness want to rip your clothes off
it's partly attributable to to higher
levels of androgens like testosterone
but certainly not exclusively there's a
massive social component to it as well
so yes men find it easier to maintain
that um but I think it's really
important to say because there will be
men listening to this that will be
worried about their desire as we've said
earlier 15% is actually quite a large
number it's not all men some men really
struggle to keep hold of that
spontaneous desire in a long-term
relationship and just to clarify the
reactive desire is the desire that kicks
in once you've begun basically yeah some
kind of sexual stimuli some kind of
sexual
currency um it comes after
arousal I want to close off on the
subject of parents um I'm not a parent
yet but my brother has three kids and
they're under the age of six they're six
and under he's got three of them I'm
going to send in my book yes I'm going
I'm sure he's he's going to listen
anyway um and from that I've I've been
able to understand on a surface level
the plight of a parent sleep um kids
waking up in the middle of the night
work pressures a lot of people are
working at home now as well so that that
has impacts on sleep and how you're
feeling and your mental health and all
those things and to think that couples
irrespective of children are struggling
with sex you you said at the start of
this conversation but it says in your
book as well that we're having less and
less sex um when you compare one decade
to the previous decade and there was
another study that I saw that said
there's been General declines in sexual
frequency in other count around the
world as well like Japan Australia
Finland and the USA mhm so we know that
like we're we're having less sex with
each other anyway and then you throw
kids into the mix which I just I don't
know I've not been there yet so I've not
crossed that bridge but I'm trying to
figure out when I do come to that bridge
how on Earth I'm going to be able to
have sexual desire when I'm a very busy
CEO running multiple businesses
traveling all over the world seeing my
partner currently not very much you know
and trying to make those moments where
we do spend time together special then
you throw in little Timmy who's
going and he's not going to care about
my schedule no and to it's going to
become my priority for rightfully so if
he behaves himself and then where sex
going to go where you know yeah this is
why it's it's a real challenge for
parents and I think one of the key
things one of the reasons I wrote the
book actually is because the first thing
that we can do for parents is talk about
the fact that it's normal okay it's not
you it's not your relationship it's
nothing about the two of you together
that means you shouldn't be together
it's challenging to have a good sex life
when you've got young kids at home it's
challenging for everyone I think the
second thing that we can do is explain
to people what the factors are that tend
to make a difference
so people know about pregnancy people
know about trying to conceive they
understand that these things will impact
on their sex life but I think the things
that they don't acknowledge or don't
realize as much is the trajectory that
that sets them on in the early stages
and the trajectory that that first year
of having a newborn baby will set you on
in terms of that reduction in sexual
currency in terms of resentments that
might start to breed and how your
relationship Dynamic becomes in terms of
how equal the mental load is and we know
that the mental load so that's kind of
the unequal division of labor which
often falls on women in heterosexual
relationships particularly when kids
come along we know that there's a direct
correlation between couples who divide
that household labor in a kind of
Equitable and transparent way and sexual
satisfaction so it seems quite hard to
believe but actually it doesn't have to
be completely equal but if you feel as
though your partner is pulling their
weight if you feel as though it's not
all automatically falling to you we know
that people generally tend to have
better sex so there's all kinds of
things which parents need to know about
their sex life that they don't is that
about resentment though is that yeah
it's resentment and it's about what I
mentioned earlier about seeing your
partner almost as a third child you're
you're you're the captain of the house
right you're the boss of the house and
you have to hold in your mind everything
you're the CEO of the house you have to
hold in your mind everything that needs
doing even for your partner yeah that
they they're not holding anything
they're not remembering the kids'
birthdays they're not thinking they need
to buy a present you're having to do
that that takes your attention away from
sex and it also raises your resentment
and sexual satisfaction can really
suffer but there are a few other things
that I like to talk about in the book
that I think are really important for
parents and one of them is I compare the
Journey of Parenthood a little bit like
um a kind of navigation across the seas
right so Parenthood is the storm and
it's a storm for everyone and there are
different phases of the storm and some
of it you just need to Baton down the
hatches and get through it as unscathed
as you can and not worry about sex so
much that might be like the newborn
phase but then there are also parts of
the journey where you might have found
yourself knocked off course a little bit
and what you actually need to do is take
stock of the boat and say hold on what
what's going on here what are we doing
if we continue on this trajectory 10 15
years down the line we're likely to be
in a place where sex is
unrecoverable versus if we make a small
change a degree or two to the left or
right very small changes over the long
term we might end up in an entirely
different destination
and so the book is all about what are
those small changes and this might be
surprising to some people it's not
having more sex it's other ways of
increasing sexual satisfaction so for
example we know that when we turn each
other down gently for sex it increases
sexual satisfaction we know that when we
increase sexual currency which doesn't
have to take much time we increase
sexual satisfaction so there are many
things that people can do even if they
don't feel they have time or head space
for sex or until they have the time and
head space for sex that can just keep
that boat kind of heading in the right
direction what about what's the
relationship there with sleep and sex
then because obviously if if I've got
little Timmy crying at night time at
3:00 a.m. uh I'm going to be poorly
slept the next day which means will that
have an impact on how horny I am yes
yeah big relationship between sleep and
sex for all of us we know that if you
get a good night's sleep your chances of
having sex the next day increase by 14%
so that's for all of us when it comes to
parents there is some quite interesting
data about the impact of nighttime
waking on your sex life we know that the
number of times you get up in the night
to tends to a child like to go to the
cot or the bed to see to a crying child
the number of times you get up has an
impact on what's happening in your sex
life and for your desire so we tend to
see the more times you get up the less
happy you are with your sex life and the
reason for that is because not not
getting a good night's sleep disrupts um
how the body responds to sexual response
so how the chemicals in the body that
help us be prepared for arousal to build
but also it's the cognitive distraction
of being woken up by something quite
upsetting someone else crying and having
to deal with it which we know disrupts
the part of our sleep the RM sleep which
actually we need for our sexual
functioning so even just knowing that as
a parent and knowing that
look if you're getting up many times a
night don't worry about your sex life
for the time being what you can do as a
couple is focus on sharing that more
equally because if one of you is getting
a good night's sleep and feeling horny
all the time and another one's getting
up three times and sex is the last thing
on their mind probably the best thing
that you can do is try and share it is
there a certain age
where sex comes back in in terms of your
children's age is there like when you
get to I don't know 10 years old then
sex comes back in typically yeah so we
know that people start getting sleep
from when their kid is about six but
obviously if you've got another one
that's a bit younger um then you might
be starting the process all over again
so given that sleep's so important the
older they get the better that is for
people's sex lives I mean it's hugely
variable so there are plenty of people
that start having sex again um you know
within three months of their baby being
born and yes it may be less frequent
than before but it doesn't disrupt their
sex lives as much much and then there's
plenty of people whereby it might take
them a year to even start having sex
again and then the frequency of having
sex might stay quite infrequent for some
time what's interesting though in how
quickly people get back to it is that
how quickly people get back to it is
often about the habits that they've then
fallen into as a sexual couple so low
levels of sexual currency high levels of
awkwardness not prioritizing time
together you know Parenthood is
basically a jug of priorities right all
the time there's always something else
you should be doing and so the sex that
you have has to be enticing enough for
your brain to say yeah I'm going to
sacrifice that for sex because there's
always something else that you should be
doing with your time so it's those
habits that we fall into around our sex
lives that dictate how quickly people
get back into it at what point does
someone should they reach out to a
person like you for help I wish people
would do it sooner they always wait
until it's got really bad and by that
time it's fine we can still reverse it
there's a lot we can do but all these
habits have kind of settled in all of
this awkwardness pressure resentment
people have moved to quite polarized
positions it would be great if people
came earlier I'd like people to think of
someone like me a bit like a personal
trainer for your sex life that you don't
necessarily go to a personal trainer
just when I don't know things are
terrible you go because you want to
improve something
maintain yeah or maintain um I'd love
people to see it that way you use the
word we can always reverse it but then a
couple of moments before you use the
word unrecoverable now I wanted to know
is is there ever a situation have you
ever seen patients in your practice
where you knew intuitively this is
unrecoverable oh of course of course
what were the Hallmarks of unrecoverable
um so the Gans talk about the four
horsemen and they talk about resentment
as being um an aspect of a relationship
Dynamic that often means that it can be
quite hard for people to recover from
that and for the relationship to survive
sometimes when you're talking about sex
if resentment comes across quite
strongly in the way that people talk to
each other it gives you a good
indication that this is going to be
quite challenging I would say though
that sometimes unrecoverable is a good
outcome because we're not necessarily
destined to be monogamous we're not
necessarily destined to be with one
person person yes social convention
makes us feel that that should be the
case but for some people a good outcome
is having a split and a good sexual
relationship with someone else so
sometimes identifying that it's
unrecoverable because it's gone so far
it's been so long perhaps they were
never that sexually compatible in the
first place decades later there's tons
of resentment maybe it is the best thing
at that point and perhaps that is a good
outcome for some
people point of curiosity what are the
the types of problems that people come
to you with the types of challenges they
come to you with what what is you know
you see a couple sit down um the first
sentence out of their mouth what are
those sort of five most popular
sentences that come out of their mouth
um it would be the first one and by far
the most popular is we have a great
relationship but and it's a problem with
sex usually a problem with initiation or
desire that is by far the most common
presentation we love each other
immensely you know we have so much
respect for each other we have a great
partnership but sex just doesn't happen
or it doesn't happen in the way that we
want the second is probably specific
problems that people have with their
bodies and sex so people that are
experiencing pain particularly painful
penetration people who are worrying
about erections worrying about orgasms
these things are all quite
common the third is probably navigating
change so we talked earlier about how
sexual relationships need to be able to
flex and allow growth for us as
individuals and quite often because we
can't talk about it growth happens for
one person and then they're suddenly not
getting their sexual needs met so for
example they might suddenly decide that
there's something that they're into or
want to explore that they do not feel
able to talk about with their partner
and without it the sexual relationship
is a crisis point and so we need to be
able to
allow space for that sexual relationship
to see whether it can withstand that
change and growth and create that
culture of growth I'm I was just playing
in my mind all the all the really
incredible things you must have heard
from people about like their fantasies
and stuff like that and
um I'm trying not to break your client
patient
confidentiality just thinking about the
other like the unexpected things that
people come to you and ask you about you
know what's one of the most unexpected
things after 20 years of doing my job
one of the things that has come up a lot
recently that has surprised me and it
may not surprise you I don't know if
you've got any but the impact of pets on
people's sex lives oh my have you got
any pets I've got a dog and he loves to
watch there you go you know this was a
massive surprise to me I've been doing
this job decades and only recently I
something came up on my insta and it
blew up with people saying yeah my pet's
con constantly ruining the mood they're
either trying to get involved or they're
watching or they're in the room or it
puts the other person off this was one
of the biggest surprises to me honestly
so what's the so people are saying that
what the pet is jumping in or my pet my
my dog um I think he was concerned about
my partner I think he thinks that she's
being attacked or protective yeah he's
very very protective so sometimes I
think he thinks he looks really upset
and then when he was younger he used to
like wee himself oh when he was watching
which is like a nervous Wing cuz money
and Daddy are fighting it's like well I
think it was we it was I mean it's it's
a big deal when you think about what we
talked earlier about attention and
distraction because nobody really wants
to have to take account of a third
person in in well unless you want a
third person in the room but you know a
pet in the room basically it's quite
distracting right it is yeah and if you
put them outside my understanding
because I've heard this as cats as well
my understanding is that they will bar
and scratch at the door it's not like
you can keep them away very easily this
is a massive challenge pets should come
with a warning label for your sex life
so you think pet should not be invited
into the I would say not but I mean some
people are obviously fine with it but
the reaction I got from people on my
social media was this is a major problem
and I've never heard of it before I've
never seen it written in research it's a
new thing maybe it's lockdown everyone
got pets are you hopeful for the uh
trajectory of sex in this world I really
am actually there is I think there's
been a a boost of sex positivity um in
the media on social media on TV shows
like sex
education I think what I've noticed is
that's not yet trickled down to the
therapy room so you know what I see and
think is happening I guess because I'm
plugged into those things and the types
of people I follow on social media I
really feel like it's changing and
people are understanding more about sex
feeling more assertive about sex
understanding that it doesn't have to
look one way looking at different
relationship structures not just
assuming monogamy not just assuming
heterosexuality but actually what I see
in the therapy room is that's not
trickled down yet and so my hope is that
in the decade that follows we'll be in
quite a different place and you know for
me as a parent of two boys that's quite
an exciting place to be because we know
that our first sexual experience is
actually quite influential in dictating
our sexual satisfaction lifelong so to
be able to go into sex with more
knowledge to be able to have an
experience that is good rather than bad
which is most people's first experience
I think that's a great gift that we can
give younger people you use the word
change there talking about how we have
to sort of grow and adapt through our
sexual Journey with a long-term partner
one of the changes that I've come to
learn that takes place from doing this
podcast is menopause M and that cans on
someone's sexuales has an on our
hormones and how we're feeling I'm
learning more and more about menopause
but I imagine some of the people that
come to you and talk about their sexual
desire are referencing the impact that
menopause has had or paropa AB
absolutely the symptoms of menopause can
be um really unpleasant for a lot of
people not for everyone of course but
things like hot flushes and um aches and
pains and mood changes they obviously
can really disrupt your interest in sex
there's also other things going on in
menopause that are more
kind of Psychosocial as well often
around stay long-term relationships all
the things we've talked about around
desire and sometimes the work is
figuring out how much of it is to do
with menopause which some of it might be
how much of it was there before and is
exacerbated by those symptoms of
menopause but it's really important in
fact hormonal fluctuations for all
people with menstrual cycles actually
are quite important when it comes to sex
and we do see changes across the monthly
cycle in um people's receptiveness to
sex and also the types of sex that
they're interested in changes one of the
changes that happens when we have kids
is our bodies change yeah hugely and
that can have a big impact I imagine on
self-confidence but also potentially
attraction yeah I think there's often a
big worry that those body changes will
influence attraction and again because
we don't talk about it people never get
to find out so a lot of people tell me
that they're worried that their partner
won't find them as attractive because
they've got stretch marks or because
their body looks different and actually
they've never voiced that part of the
success of therapy is people speak the
things that they don't speak elsewhere
and sometimes just having a conversation
about those things means that the
problem is removed instantly by someone
saying well actually no like I can see
your body's change but you know the way
your belly looks isn't the sole
attraction that I have for you so yes
it's changed but no it's not shifted my
attraction for you so so yeah changes um
to body image and how that affects you
during sex but also what you were AA
partner might think can be a huge thing
for parents are we are we meant to be
monogamous no is that a shitty question
are we meant to be anything no you know
it's not a very popular answer this and
actually when I post about this on my
socials people hate it because it really
disrupts what a lot of us are doing I'm
monogamous myself right but we are not
destined to be ogous we there isn't
anything about humans that means that
we're designed to maintain sexual
interest in the same person for a long
amount of time that's why if we have sex
with the same person forever if you
don't work at it if you don't nurture it
if you don't allow growth it's going to
be challenging because we're not
designed to do it our brains they get
bored they need um novelty they don't
like
predictability so we're not designed to
be monogamous and I think what's
fascinating is that we all just kind of
fall into it because it's a social
construct that is kind of politically
and economically and historically
present we just think that's what we
should do it's fine if people choose it
of course it is but I think if you
choose monogamy I think you have to have
your eyes open to the fact that you
can't expect that that means you'll
maintain sexual interest for that person
without any
effort that's what we know about
long-term monogamy spontaneous desire
will drop sexual currency will drop
person will become very familiar you'll
need to find ways to keep sex novel
you'll need to not order the set menu
you'll need to go for the buffet you
need to bring different versions of
yourself into sex there's so many things
that you need to be conscious of if you
choose monogamy if you want a good sex
life and I think monogamy tends to bring
with it an idea that that person will
just always remain sexually interested
in you because you've married them or
perhaps you don't need to work at it and
I think those things can be quite
harmful those
ideas I've read like only four or five%
of people identify as being polygamous
is that the right word polygamy so I
mean there are many different words but
um in terms of open relationship
structures of which there are many I
think I think they're on the rise and I
think that's a good thing because I
think all of us a bit like as I said
earlier that idea of compulsory
heterosexuality you're kind of
monogamous and straight unless you prove
otherwise or choose otherwise right it'd
be great if we all had an idea that well
you could be any of those things and
there is not a one that's best or right
but why don't you look at all the
options before you make your mind up do
you have people come and see you that
are in those polygamous relationships
yeah absolutely and I have plenty of
people come and see me that are moving
from monogamy into opening up and want
to think about how they can do that in a
way that privileges their kind of Prim
primary relationship so that that's
actually a really wonderful thing to
work with I love working with those
couples because actually they're really
able to think outside the box and they
can separate their love from each other
and their commitment to each other from
their sexual interests and they cannot
be threatened by the idea of sex
elsewhere um it's yeah it's really fun
to work with a new set of problems and
does it work I would say a new set of
solutions interesting does it does it
work yes but like monogamy it only works
if you work at it because there are
another set of things that you might
need to work at that are you know you
might not need to work on novelty you
might not need to work on predictability
um because you you're getting that with
different partners but you do need to
work on boundaries communication um how
you manage it together and the constant
flux of that so it all requires work
what if you're in a relationship right
now and you want an open relationship
what is the best way to broker that
conversation with your partner is it
just a hey babe let's sit down and have
dinner um I'd like to have an open
relationship I think you know direct is
good but also if you want to test the
waters you might say like we talked
about earlier with communication I was
listening to this podcast turns out that
you know a lot of us choose monogamy
without even thinking it through did you
do that did you choose monogamy did you
know that was right for you I've been
thinking about this for myself recently
I don't know why I chose it my partner
said that to me it would be like a
dagger in the heart I'd be oh gosh got
nervous even hearing that cuz it because
you know what they're implying they're
implying that they want to go shag
someone
else yeah and we you know one of our
ideas about sex and sexual relationships
is that the attraction and desire we
have for our partner or the romantic
love we have for our partner is finite
MH and that if it moves to someone else
it's lost from us MH and it's it's a
really interesting concept that we only
really have with romantic love like we
don't have it with love for our children
we don't think if we have another one
we'll stop loving the first one and we
don't have it for our friends right we
can have multiple friends and love them
all equally or love them all differently
so you think we can love multiple people
absolutely yeah but I think we are we
feel fear about the concept of it simply
because in our mind that is a threat to
our connection I think you know it's a
really it's a really interesting concept
and it'd be it'll be fascinating to see
where we go with different relationship
structures in in the decades that follow
Dr Karen
gurny we have a closing judici on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest not knowing
who they're leaving it for and there's
two questions that have been left for
you the first one is what's the worst
advice you've ever
received the worst advice I've ever
received was to not become a
psychologist cuz I wasn't cut out for it
who gave you that advice my first
supervisor I hope she's
listening what when she said you're not
cut out for it MH what did she mean she
said to me there are many qualities
required to be a good clinical
psychologist unfortunately you don't
have any of them what a thing to say to
somebody it was very early on in my
career I must have been you know 19 20
um so yeah I'm glad to have proved her
wrong and the second question is what's
the best advice you can offer Steven
bartler on how he can improve
well I'll obviously have to focus it on
sex okay and it's going to be create a
culture of talking about sex
often initiate freely and be really
comfortable with being turned down thank
you so much it's been an absolute um
honor to go on this journey of sex with
you I mean that sounds a little bit
strange but you know what I me go with
it yeah um to learn about your
perspective on sex it's really
refreshing I've spoken to a few people
that are experts on the subject matter
of sex and orgasms and everything in
between but your perspective is um
really refreshing because it focuses on
first reframing what sex is and some of
the like underlying um psychological
barriers that we create about our
perceptions of what sex is and if we
start there then we probably won't have
a lot of these other Upstream symptoms
of that like misunderstanding that's
exactly of what sex is um and also I've
from doing this podcast had tons of
parents that have contacted me asking
about when you become a parent what
happen in your sex life so your book has
come at a fantastic time in culture I
recommend people go and get both books
um both of which are available now both
are incredible reads they're really
inclusive and easy to read and your new
book how not to let having kids ruin
your sex life is essential reading for
all parents that might be struggling
with this so thank you really appr thank
you it's been a
pleasure I think it was about a year ago
I became obsessed with sleep to the
point that as many of you know I pretty
much have it as a non-negotiable one of
the things that I found is's a brand
called Eight sleep that sponsor this
podcast and that is the cover that I
have on my bed some of you will know
that in order to have optimal sleep our
bodies need to be a certain temperature
and there's slight variance between all
of us that's exactly what eight sleep
does it learns my body and regulates
both sides of my bed with two people on
it so that we both have optimal sleep
and on the app you can also see how much
you've slept if you've underslept and
how you've performed across multiple
stages of sleep it is a bit of a
revelation in my life I have to be
honest it automatically regulates our
temperature so we sleep deeper and
therefore wake up feeling more restored
more energized and more capable to
pursue our goals the podcast sponsors
that I have are brands that I love and
use and eight sleep is one of them I've
had so many technological game changes
in my life and eight sleep is certainly
one of them check it out at 8sleep.com
stepen for Holiday
[Music]
savings
oh